An Implementation of the Combinatorial Auction Problem in ECLi
PSe
Robert Menke and Rina Dechter
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, California 92717-3425
http://www.ics.uci.edu/~rmenke/
{rmenke, dechter}@ics.uci.edu
In a traditional auction, items are placed “up for bids” in
an arbitrary sequence. For many bidders, this model is inad-
equate because the individual items increase in value when
held in conjunction with other items. Combinatorial auc-
tions allow bidders to bid upon multiple items simultane-
ously. While this resolves the problems for the bidders, it
increases the problem of the auctioneer: determining the op-
timal selection of bids to maximize revenue is NP-complete.
(Sandholm 1999) suggests an algorithm that reduces the
search space considerably. His algorithm, a DFS of the prob-
lem space using an ancillary data structure called a Bidtree,
takes advantage of two properties of “real-life” auctions:
that the bids submitted would be sparse and that the order
in which bids are selected is irrelevant. The Bidtree helps
select the next bid to be considered.
The goal of this project is to evaluate the general princi-
ples and algorithms developed for constraint processing in
recent years, as well as the tools and languages facilitating
the use of constraints for problem solving using the auction
problem as a benchmark. By comparing general constraint-
processing algorithms against methods tailored for this task,
the power of such general algorithms can be demonstrated.
This project was initiated during a class in the department of
Information and Computer Science at the University of Cal-
ifornia, Irvine. Specifically, the constraint processing lan-
guage ECLi
PSe
(ECLiPSe 1995) was used, which has as
its basic algorithm backtracking with forward-checking and
uses branch-and-bound for optimization tasks. There were
three subgoals of this project: first, implement the combi-
natorial auction problem in ECLi
PSe
; second, implement
Sandholm’s solution using ECLi
PSe
; and third, investigate
the possibility of improving the search using other heuris-
tics.
It is important to realize that the Bidtree algorithm does
not take into account the values the bidders have associ-
ated with each bid, nor does it consider (in this form of the
algorithm) whether a mechanism for forward checking has
been incorporated into the implementation language. Since
ECLi
PSe
does support forward checking, the Bidtree algo-
rithm simply becomes a static ordering of the variables.
The alternative bid selection rules used dynamic variable
ordering to improve performance. The first approach was
Copyright c
 2000, American Association for Artificial Intelli-
gence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
most constrained bid (MCB), which selected the bid whose
set of items had the most non-empty intersections with all of
the bids, thus elimintating more feasible future bids.
The second algorithm used the most valuable bid (MVB)
rule. MVB selected the bid that had the largest amortized
value (the value divided by the size of the set). It was hoped
that the MVB selection rule would produce a higher rev-
enue in its initial solution. This is desirable because the
auctioneer may wish to stop the search before the algorithm
completes. Additionally, a higher revenue discovered ear-
lier would produce a better bound and would result in faster
convergence to the optimal solution.
The data sets in the full report were generated by the
same methods as in the Sandholm paper, but with scaled pa-
rameters because of resource limitations. Two results using
unscaled parameters are summarized in Table 1. In most
cases the MVB algorithm showed significant improvement
over Bidtree in time to completion and the number of refine-
ments to the bound. More experimental results may be seen
at http://www.ics.uci.edu/~rmenke/runs/.
References
1995. ECLiPSe User Manual, v. 3.5. Available at
http://www.ecrc.de/eclipse/eclipse.html.
Sandholm, T. W. 1999. An algorithm for optimal winner
determination in combinatorial auctions. In International
Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), 542–
547.
Experiment Method Total search Best revenue
time found at
150 bids, MCB 20627.70 s 13517.25 s
25 items, Bidtree 18739.12 s 7847.97 s
3 items/bid MVB 2960.42 s 326.79 s
50 bids, MCB 315.57 s 238.05 s
75 items, Bidtree 208.47 s 1.85 s
value by size MVB 78.66 s 11.69 s
50 bids, MCB 624.75 s 457.21 s
75 items, Bidtree 4220.93 s 2811.56 s
3 items/bid MVB 231.41 s 55.74 s
Table 1: Comparison of performance of the three algorithms
From: AAAI-00 Proceedings. Copyright © 2000, AAAI (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
